When I was young I doubted stories about great spiritual masters from our past. People who hear those stories usually heap scorn on their pious impracticality, I just wondered what was really going on. One day after embarrassing myself once too often in a relationship, I decided the spiritual path was an opportunity to repair my faults. I became determined to learn to live in harmony with all of nature.

Years of adventures led me ever deeper into meditation, into becoming vegetarian, eventually to India, and while there to picking up just enough Hindi to get by. My experiences were amazing, shattering deep misconceptions I’d wasted time and energy on for years. Unfortunately my focus on purification went overboard. I forgot that the ever present amoebas and parasites were challenging enough and ended up reducing my body to a shadow of its former health. At that point common sense finally returned and I fled to a healthier place. Considering the state of rural India, that meant almost anywhere.

My refuge somehow ended up being Northern China, where I began teaching English at a University. I went with no qualifications other than being able to speak English, knowing no one, and not speaking a word of Mandarin. Within hours I realized I was in a spiritual desert. An extremely clean one, compared to India, but none the less a desert. One of the key supports for a spiritual life is living among like minded people. It looked like they were going to be hard to find.

After a few weeks I was delighted to discover two of my students had broken any number of party guidelines to learn meditation. One I immediately wanted to know. She was in her early twenties, with the round cheerful face common in China. The first time we hung out, she carefully explained that she had a long term boyfriend, but he was afraid of commitment. Then she sighed and suggested she was willing to make changes in her life. When she started calling me up late at night from the ‘English’ bar I began to suspect what those changes were.

She dawdled when she walked, which drove me crazy. I like to get where I'm going, not float around in a cloud of ambivalent niceness. She also lacked deep experiences in meditation, her father was a virtual monk with a terrible temper and no English, and her master could only visit China illegally. All this meant there was no way I wanted to rely on her for spiritual support.

The other meditator was Mindy. Thirty something and very determined, she had the focused attention that comes after years of studying Kung Fu. Added to that, she was gorgeous. I eventually learned that she wasn’t actively meditating. She merely studied Buddhism and knew how. Instead, her spare time was spent talking to dragons, then using their advice to help female clients deal with their problems. For months I avoided her, figuring she’d end up leading me astray.

Since she was a student, I couldn't completely avoid her. Besides, she was rapidly becoming, in my mind at least, my meditator, my bulwark against materialism. So I let her talk me into a trip that I knew from the start would be a disaster. She insisted a distant, peaceful temple would be the perfect place for me to enjoy deep meditation. The trouble was, the trip included two days of ungodly travel during golden week. This is a phenomenon completely unique to China. Almost everyone in the whole country is given a week off, and most insist on being part of a mass migration back to their old family home.

Millions of people rush for tickets on the trains. To prevent a black market in tickets, they are only made available a few days before the celebration begins. Obviously there is no possible way everyone can get seats. As a concession to the millions who would miss out, the trains offer standing room tickets. These are for the cheaper cars, the ones with hard seats, ensuring they are jammed full.

Mindy was proud of having somehow gotten three of us on the train. She didn't get soft beds, or hard bunks, or even soft seats. No, they were those hard, unforgiving seats, and on a slow train. Surrounded by all the stoicly standing extra passengers. 

This was several years ago, so it is a little unfair to complain about it not being fast. Back then they were all slow, although speed is a relative thing. China's slow trains are faster than even the best trains in North America, and in China they still go directly to every city centre&mdash;and everyone still uses them.

Regardless of the relative quality of the train, we ended up crammed into a hard bench seat, Mindy asleep on one of my shoulders and her nine year old daughter asleep in my lap. I was stuck neither asleep nor able to meditate. The one thing I was able to do was get grumpy. By the time the train stopped I was definitely not enjoying life. Then we had to hire a taxi to get to the temple, and once there Mindy talked for what seemed like an hour with the woman running a farmhouse hostel by the temple.

I never get headaches, but I had a cracking one by the time she was finished, and as a result the people around me were no longer enjoying life either. Mindy ordered me to rest in the farmhouse and went off to manage our accommodations. I grumbled at everything, including the bed&mdash;a massive brick slab that ran all the way down one side of the building, forming a communal resting place that could hold a dozen stacked end on end, or a lot more if you didn't mind crowding in a bit. There was no hope there of quiet, private meditation time.

When Mindy returned I was still grumpy, but at least slightly rested. She finally explained that only women could stay at the temple. She'd been planning to dump me in the hostel, but after enduring my complaints she parked her sister there instead. She'd somehow talked the temple into letting me use a one room shed well up the mountain. It too had a brick bed heated by a tiny wood fire. These are the famous kàngs, which keep peasants and nobles alike warm in the winter and have done so for countless centuries. Unfortunately there is a tradition in India that yogis never have fire inside their dwelling. I'm not a yogi, but I can't help trying. I was stuck with a cold and very hard place to sleep.

Among other challenges, the place was also missing any of the traditional parts of a toilet, and the trail visitors walk to get up the mountain passed directly above the hut, with a very nice view of everything below. This made impromptu outdoor showers and bathroom breaks more challenging than they needed to be. It wasn't much good for meditation either. By the time I started sliding into deeper experiences, Mindy would turn up at my door insisting it was time to come out for a hike on the mountain.

To top it off nicely, the trip back ended up even more nightmarish than the trip down. Mindy's sister got me a sleeper ticket&mdash;hooray!&mdash;but Mindy was unable to get anything but a standing ticket for her daughter. If we did nothing she would end up travelling back by herself. In order to get her daughter into my compartment I spent considerable time huddled on the floor of a car jammed full of standees, negotiating with a very kind conductress who herself was having to negotiate with the higher ups. After all the discomfort and lost sleep during the trip I was seriously reluctant to travel with her, or in fact do anything with Mindy ever again. Except there was that constant nagging thought about how easy it is to get caught up in the world, if you have no spiritual people around you.

I weakened, and she got creative. She suggested we meet with her master, Little Buddha, to see what advice she had for me. When we finally did meet, it was almost a year after I first meet Mindy. I blame that delay on ethical issues. On top of my habit of ignoring ordinary good advice, I refuse to  trust anyone who supposedly knows the deepest secrets of life. I’m even less inclined to consult them if they call themselves a ‘master’, claiming some level of final authority.

Mindy insisted the translation was wrong. Furthermore, she explained, there was no implied commitment to my actually following Little Buddha’s suggestions. Besides, she lived nearby, and the appointment was already made. So I was dragged, feebly protesting, into a taxi to meet Little Buddha.

She had studied in Tibet and was said to be able to see deeply into anyone’s past. Even better, she had a reputation for helping people take charge of their own unique path to enlightenment. 

We got out in the business district where Little Buddha lives, then cut through an unobtrusive grey alley carved out of the front of an impressive looking shop. From there we ended up in a dead end courtyard jammed full of derelict looking sheds owned by small businesses. Mindy led me up a flight of decrepit stairs, across a balcony, and into a short hallway. The first door turned out to be Little Buddha’s tiny apartment, her bedroom window overlooking one of the busiest streets in the city.

We met in the quieter side of her suite, facing that dismal courtyard, the only view the grey concrete masses of eight story tall walk up apartments. There wasn’t a speck of green. It wasn’t pretty, but it sure was typical of that part of town. A sensible person would have wondered how any trace of spirituality could survive in that environment. I sat down to see what I could learn.

Mindy and I perched on tiny stools while Little Buddha sat on her daughter’s bed. I hoped they were discussing ways to speed up my progress. She and Mindy chattered away in Mandarin for ages, until Mindy reluctantly broke off for a sketchy translation. First she listed important spiritual leaders I had been in the past. This part seems unreliable yet de rigueur among Buddhists, as if they are helpfully establishing your credentials. 

Then she began telling me where we were going. It turns out Chinese tradition demands visiting holy places to earn points towards enlightenment. Little Buddha knew about my previous travels. She figured if I visited three more holy spots I’d earn myself some kind of breakthrough.

It was already October, which is an ideal time to visit southern China, but not practical for getting leave from work. Left to myself, I would probably have prevaricated, and the trip would never have happened. However at that point my Mom finally admitted she was scheduled for surgery and would need someone to look after her. Ming persuaded me our journey should be squeezed in before a trip home to help her recover. 

Some people just never learn. But then, they don’t have adventures either. I figured I had acquired enough survival skills that I was now capable of handling Mindy. I was wrong, but not as wrong as before. And mistakes are how we learn.

In China, the great places of pilgrimage are mountains. There are five principle ones for Taoists, four for Buddhists, and an enormous host of less popular crags with smaller and often sadly neglected temples. They may not make the list of immortal temples, yet a few of those humbler places still draw half a million visitors a year to petition for celestial favors. While there pilgrims spend generously.

After my time in India I was shocked at how wealthy the leaders of Chinese temples can be. Stranger still, many of the smaller temples are for profit enterprises run by small investors. Some of the largest are state treasures, run by the government with hired monks in attendance. It was even more shocking to discover the careful guidance of the communist party had persuaded monks to give up celibacy. Chinese Buddhist monks can marry. What a horrifying concept!

The holiness of China's sites may not be what it was, but four of China's holiest mountains are a day’s travel from Shanghai. My our first thought was to start from there. It would be a natural stop for a trip home, and I'd never have to admit I was sneaking off to do some illicit tourism.

My plan was to start by heading south to a nearby island called Putuóshan, roughly translated as Rugged Mountain. A strange name for a place that is mostly flat, but pilgrimage spots must be called mountains. Turns out in China: “A mountain is famous not for its height, but for its holiness.” That whole island is sacred to Guanyin Púsà, the embodiment of compassion. (With the unfortunate exception of some of the hotels, whose owners are among the most avaricious in China) Guanyin is the protector of women and children, the champion of the sick, the disabled, and the poor.

The idea was to visit her island, then loop up to Jiuhuáshan, or Nine Flowers Mountain. That set of peaks is considered the home of Dìzàng Púsà. He plunges fearlessly into any place or situation to help those in need. His qualities include unflagging optimism, fearlessness, and gentleness. Even better, he never abandons anyone who calls on him for help.

It didn’t take Mindy long to get on her computer and began researching other travel options. I soon discovered we had two more spots to visit and we weren’t starting out in Shanghai. Sandwiched in between our spiritual adventures would be a visit to the most famous tourist mountain in all of China, Huángshan, or Yellow Mountain. From there we’d make a stop at the jewel of China’s literary past, West Lake, ancient home of the immortal White Snake. Through incomparable skill in the Tao, she lived among the people of the world as a great lady.

transition?

My job was satisfying, but it didn’t pay well enough to let us travel first class. Fortunately Mindy was not expecting much. Her idea of an interesting trip, as you may have gathered, is to head out on the infamous hard seats of slow trains or on the only slightly more comfortable seats of long distance buses. If you've done this kind of travel you'll know it palls quickly when you have a lot of luggage. Everything in one backpack became my goal.

In the weeks before I left I hunted for a pack that could double as a suitcase and had wheels. I'm still not sure why I wanted the extra weight and awkwardness of wheels, but it sure reduced the number I could look at. Eventually I found a gorgeous silver one, with a special compartment underneath for shoes and all kinds of compartments inside, including one for a computer. They only wanted $70 for this beautiful thing. It had my name all over it.

After much discussion, everyone helping me agreed. It was much too expensive. And I wasn't going to carry a heavy computer anyway. They insisted we keep looking until they found one costing a third of that. With everyone now fully approving, I was told to ignore how small it was and how much space was taken up by the frame. After all, small was the whole idea. Big allows you to load too much in and it soon gets heavy, a real nuisance when travelling. We also ignored the bright red color and the funny handle that stuck out the top like an antenna. Everyone knew I wasn’t trying to look cool. I was trying to make travel easier.

Transition?

Officially meeting my boss to arrange time off work, I was still too embarrassed to mention that I was slipping off early to visit temples. Yet a week before we were due to leave I learned they had arranged a car and a good number of people from the office would be going to the airport to see me off. It would be incredibly obvious that I wasn't flying straight back home through Beijing. I wasn't even flying via Shanghai. I was flying to an insignificant city (a mere million people) that happened to be three hours by bus from the first mountain I was going to visit.

As if that wasn’t bad enough, I was travelling with Mindy. And while Mindy can be kindness personified, in emergencies she transforms into a human bulldozer, completely devoid of tact. You'll remember the disaster of our first trip? I'd better back up and give a little more detail. Mindy had ended up on the same train for the first half of the trip, but with a standing ticket. She was off in another coach, heading to visit her cousin. Her daughter had gone to visit that cousin earlier, but would miss classes unless she travelled back that night. I suspect her cousin was also told this a little late, so only another standing ticket was available.

Long past the last possible minute to arrange things properly Mindy let me know I was nominated as chaperone for a child who would be standing by herself in the aisles. Which you will probably agree is not something you ask a nine year old to do on an overnight trip.

Mindy sent a text to her daughter, ordering her to run up to me on the platform and display such extravagant affection that everyone would assume I was her long lost father. Then she sent the same text to my boss’s niece, Xiao Wáng, who I'd had the good luck to meet in the waiting room for that train. I know, the odds for that happening are not good, but this is how my life works, at least on good days.

I have never seen Xiao Wáng as furious as when we were about ten minutes from the station, and she read Mindy’s text. After hurling her cell phone across the carriage and cursing with abandon, she somehow cooled off enough to agree to stand outside with me to collect Mindy's daughter.

Then, when the conductor followed rules and wouldn’t let a little girl with no real ticket in our car, Xiao Wáng joined me jammed in the aisles of a hard seat car with the hordes of often impoverished seatless passengers, patiently lobbying the hapless conductor while a nine year old stared at her with huge sad eyes. Every time I tried to say something comforting, the little waif would turn back and impatiently hush me. The two of them were working over that poor conductor in ways I could never manage.

After half an hour of this the conductor managed to negotiate a few broken rules and let Mindy’s daughter stay with us. Xiao Wáng never forgave Ming for abandoning her daughter. Being a 'bad mother' is one of the ultimate sins in China. And guess who was organizing the office car.

Knowing they would think I was crazy, I decided it was time to admit to my boss I was sneaking away early for a temple tour. My story sounded so lame I found myself adding that I was going to get Guanyin Púsà’s blessings for my Mother. She was getting a second hip operation, you see, after the first implant had broken up. Nobody wanted the operation to go wrong, and the thought of getting some blessings for her had been there, just a tiny idea at the back of my mind. As I'd hoped, the tradition of respect for parents overcame modern insistence on practicality.

Having survived that awkward moment, I then had to explain to Xiao Wáng about Mindy, and her inclusion because I needed a real Buddhist along with me. Xiao Wáng's response made it obvious that she thought I had no judgement about women, but at least she didn’t scold me. She just quietly sniffed. There wasn’t much obvious reaction from anyone else in the office either, leaving me convinced they'd simply given up on me.