<hr>
<article class="excerpt-words"> 
At this point I remembered I needed vegetarian snacks for the trip. The only vegetarian food store I knew was a little shop across the street from the local Buddhist temple. No one there spoke English and my Mandarin didn’t let me ask any questions about what they sold. Fortunately most of their stuff was from Hong Kong so the labels were English. Better yet, the shop girls were all friendly. Saying zhège (this one) and pointing worked like a charm. I soon had a basketful of bland tofu based emergency rations.

Unfortunately I was running late and had to rush out of the store to get home. Twenty feet from the door a stranger approached me — as in India, beggars love temples, and can be counted on to lie  in wait, ready to try any trick for a little cash. Especially from a westerner, a person so obviously rich. Whoever he was, he tried to stop me, but when I ignored him he hustled off.

I was relieved, assuming he'd given up, but as soon as I rounded the corner, he was in my face again, walking backwards so he could talk to me while trying to push something into my arms. I was wary of the old trick of 'giving' you something and then demanding payment. I tried to sidle around him while holding a hand up to ward him off. He kept trying to give me whatever it was. I kept saying méiyou, thinking I was telling him I didn’t want it. Unfortunately it turns out to mean “don’t have”, which was unlikely to dissuade anyone. Some time later a sulking Qing to accidentally teach me a more effective way to convey disinterest: Ten minutes of her chanting búyào seared that phrase into my even my feeble memory.

At any rate, when the pursuing local saw I wasn’t responding, he had a brilliant idea. He pulled open my jacket, pushed the thing inside, then let go. Unfortunately, gravity is just as effective outside a temple as elsewhere. The object unexpectedly slipped through my coat to the ground and landed with a sickening crunch. I looked down and saw that between us we'd just shattered a large ceramic statue. One of Guanyin Púsà, the same being who’s island I was planning to visit.

I don't know what the sensible thing is when you've just done something that stupid, but I figured I knew who to ask. I called Ming and told her to check with Little Buddha. After being thoroughly scolded for my failed attempt to speak Mandarin, she finally agreed to talk to Little Buddha. Who for all her saintliness just happened to work as a cook at that temple.

On her instructions, I ended up buying a replacement statue for the local monks and paying for the monks to do a ceremony to appease Guanyin Púsà. After that everything was supposed to be fine. I wasn't convinced, especially since the process cost me much more than the original statue would have. And the guy apparently was just trying to give me a gift. This was both a lousy omen and an even worse reflection on my openness to adventure. And it had another unexpected side effect: There was no longer friendliness from the salesgirls in that little shop.

With food and hiking boots and backpack ready, I waited for the morning of the trip to pack. It was going to start as an ordinary working day, after all. Once I began packing, my new backpack grew stuffed far too soon. After sitting on it to get the zip to work,  I looked around and saw I hadn't packed a back up pair of shoes. So I was going to go from bitter winter in the north to a warm autumn in the south, with nothing but the brand new and very warm fur lined winter hiking boots on my feet.

I decided I could live with warm feet, but not without the other stuff still lying around. Experience had taught me that those renting out cheap rooms often think a pillow good enough that I might not want in the same bed with me. To make sure I can sleep I bring own mini-pillow. And putting on a meditation shawl is a marvellous way to transform ‘sitting around with my eyes closed, obviously hoping someone will ask me to do something else’ into ‘meditating and not to be disturbed’. Both pillow and shawl were indispensable. And then there was all that food.
</article>
<hr>
<article class="excerpt-words"> 
I grudgingly dug out a small and well travelled carry-on and began filling it up. With that unexpectedly overflowing I put on the backpack. It was a challenge to drape the carry-on’s strap over top of me and the bulk of the backpack. With the impossible accomplished, I stumbled out the door and started the long hike through campus to my office.

I was amazed to find all the staff gathered to officially present me with a gift. It was a massive traditional red knot to hang on Mom's wall, one that is said to bring good fortune.  I'm still trying to figure out how it does this, but whatever it does, it looks wonderful. Maybe those intricate patterns folding back on themselves are enlivening something. I guess I should have asked....

Unfortunately I wasn’t coming back before flying home, and I now had an enormous red cardboard box to pack  in my bags.  Before I could give in to panic, Ming arrived. The food disappeared into her bags and just enough space miraculously opened up for the knot. Oddly enough, her bags, even with all my food, were smaller than mine. Most people could learn something about travelling light from the Chinese.

It was a long trip to the airport, and with Ming and Xiao Wáng so close together, a remarkably silent one. Everyone was certainly being polite. We rushed to the airline’s counter, validated our tickets, then scrambled for the boarding area. Naturally we had to go through security, and as soon as we got there everyone from the office waved and left.

Security isn’t much of a trial compared the typical experience in the US, but they still managed to find a pocket knife I’d hidden away in my backpack. It was just large enough that they insisted on confiscating it. Unfortunately I had just bought the wretched thing to have something to open the packs of food I’d also just bought. I got mulish, and refused to be parted from it.

Ming glared at me like the spoilt child I was, grabbed the bag and headed back to the check-in counter. Twenty minutes later she showed up again, all silent and broody. At least I was happy, and after that last minor snafu certain nothing more could go wrong.
</article>